Okay. My dear Shiny friends and colleagues, it's hard to believe, but we are getting very
close to the end of our conference. I hope you're having a great time. I'm super excited
to introduce our final keynote speaker, Winston Chang. Winston is a software engineer at POSIT
and a key member of the Shiny team. Having served as its team lead with over 10 years
of experience in the R community, he has contributed to many widely used packages, including Shiny,
and ggplot, among many others. Recently, Winston has been busy working on Shiny for Python and
Shiny live. He holds a PhD in psychology from Northwestern University and is the author of the
R graphics cookbook. Today, Winston will be sharing his insights on Shiny's journey into
the Python world. His talk will discuss the lessons learned, the opportunities that Shiny
for Python opens up, and the exciting new era we are entering together as the Shiny community
grows and evolves. Whatever your experience with Shiny is, there's something in this talk
for everyone. So, let's give a warm welcome on our chat to Winston Chang, and let's learn together
how to make the most of Shiny for Python.
Hi, Philip. Thank you very much for that introduction. That was really nice.
Today, I'm going to be talking about lessons and opportunities with Shiny for Python. I should
give you a little background here. Shiny for R has been around for over 10 years now.
I didn't work on it in the very beginning. It was Joe Chang that created it in the very beginning,
but I joined the team not too long after. So, that was, yeah, it's been, you know,
over ten years now, and about a year and a half ago, the Shiny team at, well, it was then our
studio, now it's a deposit. We started working on Shiny for Python, and we didn't, you know,
we started working on it. We kept it private for a while, but after about a year's work,
we were ready to announce it to the world, which we did at last year's RStudioConf.
So, today, I'm going to talk about some of the things that I've learned in that time,
a lot of things that I've learned from working on Shiny for Python in particular,
and some of the opportunities that I think exist now that I've observed along the way.
Okay, so, I've got a bunch of different points that I want to cover, and
they aren't necessarily in any particular order, but hopefully, you'll find them interesting.
Okay, so, well, so, the first lesson is that 10 years is a long time.
It's a long time to develop a code base. So, we've been, you know, like I said, we've been
working on Shiny for all this time. It's a long time to build tools surrounding Shiny.
So, it's, you know, Shiny, the Shiny-related stuff that Posit makes, it's not just Shiny. It's
Shiny, it's, there's a web server layer, HTTPUV, there's BSLib, which Carson just gave a talk on.
There's ShinyTest, ShinyTest2, ShinyDashboard, all sorts of different things that are built
surrounding Shiny. All right, and we've had, you know, a long time to work on all of these
different things. It's also a long time for others to build tools that enhance Shiny. So,
you know, a lot of, many of the speakers at this conference have built all sorts of really,
really cool packages that help you extend Shiny and make it look better and let you do
new things with it. And 10 years is also, it's also a long time for a community of users to grow
and get to know each other and build connections. So, you know, sometimes I think about Shiny for
Python and, you know, in the Python world, for Shiny for Python, we're just getting started.
And, you know, all this stuff that is great about Shiny for R, all the stuff that has taken time to
build, it's not there yet in Python because we, you know, we just, we only announced it about half
a year ago. So, and these things don't just, they don't just happen overnight. They take time and
they take effort. So, hopefully with time, we'll be able to build these things. And not just us,
you know, at Posit, but as a community, we'll be able to build all sorts of things together.
So, that is, that's, that's something that's, you know, I find is interesting to reflect on when,
you know, when I think about how long Shiny's been around. Okay. So, the next thing is a little bit
more technical. So, naming things is hard. This is a lesson that if you've been working on software
if you've been working on software for, you know, for any period of time, you've probably
learned this. Naming things is hard, especially if these are things that other people are going to
be using. The good thing is that it's easier the second time around. So, in the early days of Shiny,
the names were based on, the names of various functions were based on what was common
in our ecosystem at the time. So, we end up with the names like these. So, we have text input,
text output, verbatim text output, plot output, render plot, UI output, and render UI with this,
you know, different interesting capitalization of UI here as opposed to there. So, you know,
over time, we had wished, we sort of, we started to wish that we'd use some different names. So,
for these names, you can, as you can see, we use camel case for most of the names,
which is at odds with the snake cased, snake case used by tidyverse packages. And, you know,
these days, we try to sort of use the same naming convention that tidyverse uses. And you can,
you saw that probably in, in Carson's talk about bslib. That's how we name our functions.
I was using snake case. So, it's more, it's a, well, it is a consistent way of naming functions.
But back then, you know, when this stuff was, when we created all this stuff,
tidyverse didn't exist. There was a bunch of packages that eventually became, you know,
the start of the tidyverse, but the tidyverse itself did not exist.
The other thing is that the, we wish that we had names that were more discoverable and
auto-completable. So, you know, if you're writing your Shiny application,
and you want to know what kind of outputs there are, you can't just type output and then hit tab,
and then it'll, you know, kind of a pop up a list. You have to know you want a text output,
or you have to know that you want a verbatim text output. You have to start typing, you know, the,
the T-E-X-T, and then hit tab, then you'll see that there's text output. But that still won't
show you that there's this other, you know, this verbatim text output. So, now the render functions
are a little different. They all start with render. So there is some auto-complete, more
discoverability there with auto-complete. But, so anyway, when we, when we worked on Shiny for
Python, you know, we actually talked quite a bit about what we should name things. And, and so this
is what we came up with. So on the left, we have the R, the names of these various R components.
And on the right, we have the Python names. So we have slider input, a text input, data input,
action button. That one's a little bit different, doesn't say input on it. And in Python, all of
these, I've prefaced them all with UI dot because they're in the UI sub-module of Shiny. So typically
you'd write them out like this, but you, you don't have to in Python. You, but you would say like UI
dot input. And then if you hit tab, you'll get a list of all these different types of inputs,
including the action button. So I think that's, you know, that's a big, that's a big benefit
for people that are learning, or even if you're experienced and you, you know, you have been away
from, been away from writing Shiny stuff for a while. When you come back to it, this is, this
will help just help you get things done faster. And the same is true for the outputs, right? So
it's UI, UI dot output, and then you hit tab, and then there's all these different options that you'd
have come up. And, and they're named more consistently than, than the ones over here,
like with the capitalization, UI is, is just, it's always lowercase. And finally, there's,
there's these, these render functions. So in R it's, well, it's like render plot with capital P,
render text, render table, render UI, where both of those letters are capitalized.
And in Python, these are all part of the render sub module. So we've rendered dot plot,
render dot text, render dot table. So even if you don't remember that, you know, there's a period
here as opposed to an underscore over there. If you hit tab in your, in your editor, you'll get
some assistance to, to help figure that out. So that's, that's one thing that is really nice with
the benefit of hindsight and to be able to go and do this when we're, when we're working on Shiny
for Python. So we had, you know, we had a good reason to use these new names and to try out a
new naming convention. And, you know, then this could be hypothetically, we could use, you know,
we could create aliases for these that look like this in R. So that, so that it's, these things are
more discoverable in R as well. And there's a couple other ones that I want to, a couple other
things that I want to touch on in terms of naming. So for reactive components, so like the, you know,
actual reactivity stuff. So I've long wished that we had names that are easier to talk about
and easier to understand and more, more in line with present-day standards.
So in particular, the two functions that I'm talking about are reactive and observe. So
with reactive, this one has always been a little bit difficult to talk about because
you can say this is a, well, in our documentation, we call it a reactive expression.
But the function name is just reactive. So sometimes we say, oh, this is a reactive,
like as a, as a noun. But we also, you say that things are reactive, like an adjective, like
reactive values are reactive. This reactive expression is reactive and observers are also
reactive. Like they, they're all part of this reactive computation model. So that is a little
bit confusing to write about. And the other thing is that a reactive expression isn't
exactly an expression. It's typically, and you know, when you're talking about computer stuff,
when you say you have an expression, you have to explicitly evaluate it. But a reactive,
this kind of reactive expression is actually more like a function. You invoke it to get the value.
So that's, that name has always been a little bit difficult to, to write about and talk about.
And also observe is also a little confusing. I think people don't really know what observe means.
And, you know, you explain, you can explain to people that involves,
well, you, for observe, you give it an expression and that expression,
you know, we're not interested in the return value. We're only interested in the side effect
that, of that, of that code. So, but still it's easy to forget that.
So in Python, we've used some different names. We've used, we used reactive calc
to represent the same thing as a reactive expression in R or this reactive
function name. And for observe, we're calling it a reactive effect. So, so this lets us use
the name reactive as an adjective. Like this, this thing is reactive. This calc is reactive.
An effect is reactive. A reactive value is also reactive. And then there's not that ambiguity
of, of like, are we talking about, you know, this adjective reactive or a noun reactive?
So this is a reactive calc, this is short for reactive calculation. This returns value. And
this is a reactive effect, which, you know, you give it a function that you want to execute
for its side effects. So, and that's in line with if you've ever used the web framework,
the JavaScript web framework called react, there's something called use effect. And you give that a
function that executes for its side effects. And again, you still, you do have to understand like
what is a side effect in a function, but at least it's right there in the name. Like this is,
you know, it's, it is, it is informative what that's for.
Okay. So the next thing that I learned working on Shiny for Python is that learning Python is not
that hard if you have a reason to learn it. So now this actually shouldn't, you know, this shouldn't
really be surprising for people because Python has a reputation as being one of the easiest
programming languages to learn. So, so it's not that hard, but you know, you might be wondering,
it's not that hard, but you know, you might be wondering, well, will I be a total beginner
again, like programming language beginner when I, if I start learning Python
or will my R knowledge transfer over to Python? And this actually, this is a more interesting
question than it might seem on the surface because R is kind of an unusual language.
So I'll just point out a few of the things that sort of stand out about R that's weird.
So in R you have one based indexing. So if you want to get the first element of a vector or the
first row of a data frame, you start at, you start counting at one and in Python you start
at zero. And so, and most programming languages are like Python. R there's no scalar values.
There's just length one vectors.
And in Python, there's this, there's a, you know, a distinction between
scalar and vector objects. So if you've got a single, you know,
a single value versus like a whole, like a, a vector of values.
Next. So R is a Lisp-like functional language and Python is an imperative object oriented language.
Now this thing about R being a Lisp-like language, if you look deep into the source code of R,
you'll see that it's actually implemented just like Lisp. It's, it's, yeah, it's, it's very
different from other programming languages or other common programming languages.
And I'll talk about this a little bit more.
Okay. And also our data frames and statistical tools, they're deeply embedded into the language.
And with Python, those, all that stuff, that's all, you know, that all comes from third party
modules. Now, I think if you're an R user, you know, some of these things are actually not that
hard to deal with, like one based indexing versus zero based indexing. You know, you can do it.
It's not that hard. You can do it. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's,
you can do it. It's not that hard to, to, to switch from, from one to the other.
These scalar values versus, no scalars versus having, you know, explicit scalar and vector
objects. That's also not too hard to deal with because with R you can, the way the syntax is
in R, it lets you treat length one vectors, lets you write them sort of like scalars in
other languages. So this transition, actually, it's not that much of a transition in practice.
Now for the next one, so R being a functional language and Python being this imperative
object oriented language, they are, they're actually quite different at the core, but
at the user level, the two languages aren't so different. Both of them are somewhat,
somewhat functional languages and also both sort of object oriented languages. So what I mean,
like by being functional languages is that Python supports first class functions. First
class function is a function as an object that you can pass to another function. And that,
that then it can invoke that function later where you can compose those functions. So R does that
and Python can do that as well. Although the syntax for it is a little bit, can be a little
bit clunkier in Python. R also is, is flexible enough that you can create an, an object system
that allows for object oriented programming, similar to Python. All right, so you can actually,
you can do this in R. So you can, they can be, they're, they're both, they're both flexible
and both of these languages are flexible enough that there's a lot of overlap in the knowledge
that you, that you have. But there is, there actually is one important difference. So in R,
most data structures are immutable and in Python, most data structures are mutable,
meaning they can be changed. If you have a data structure, it can be changed from anywhere else
in your program. Well, if that, that part of the program has a reference to the object.
So I'm just going to illustrate this with some code from a Shiny app. This is like,
this is the server code for a Shiny app. So let's say you've got a data frame. It's just got two
columns of numbers. And, and then you have a render table. So let's say you want to render
this table so that the Y column prints with two digits after the decimal point. So they look like
this, 0.10. All right, so what I'm going to do is I take, I use the sprintf function. I give it my
string format and then the column. And then I store that back in the data frame. And then I
return the data frame, but this time it has a column of strings. And then the table that gets
printed out will have numbers like that. And finally, I'll do a render plot where I just plot
this, the X and Y values as a scatter plot. And what you'll see for that scatter plot,
it'll look like this. This shouldn't be a surprise. So the X values are those X values
and the Y values are the Y values, 0.1, 0.25, and 1.6. All right. Now we can look at the same
code in Python. And if you haven't seen the Shiny for Python code, well, here's your chance. This is,
it's not so different. So you create a data frame using, this is using pandas. I say pd data frame
and I give it my values here. And then I do a render table. And this is, in Python, this is how
you format your numbers into strings with two values after the decimal point. And I save that
back in my, the Y column of DF. All right. And then I return that data frame. Excuse me. And
then I'll do the render plot. And I can use the ggplot function here because this application
uses plot nine, which is a, it's a implementation of ggplot for Python, which works remarkably well.
So if you haven't, if you use Python and you haven't used plot nine, you should definitely
check it out. Anyway, if we do this, then we get a plot that looks a little different. All right.
This, this looks like more like a straight line. So let's put these two plots side by side here.
So in R you have this sort of, you know, this thing that goes with an upward trend here. And
in Python, it looks, it almost looks like a straight line. And if you look at these Y values,
it's a little weird. It's just 0.1, 0.25, and 1.6. And these are evenly spaced.
So, you know, why did this happen? This is, this is a, this is something that is,
you know, points to a really deep difference between R and Python. So in, in the R version
of the code, when we did this, created this column of strings, and then we saved it back
into the data frame, when you do this assignment here, R actually makes a local copy of this data
frame df when you write to it. So it does it in a way that's, usually it tries, it does it in a
way that's efficient, so it doesn't have to copy everything. But it makes a local copy of df
within this scope here, those curly braces, and then it returns it. And that does not affect
this df. So this df refers to the original data frame. And so, you know, you might not have ever
even thought about this before, but those two things are, this df and this df can't affect
one another. And so you get that scatter plot like the one that, that you see on the screen there.
Now in Python, Python is actually more like, the way that Python works is, is like more programming
languages. So R is actually the weird one here, even though it behaves in a way that is convenient.
So in Python, when you do this assignment here, you say df bracket y equals this thing here.
This actually alters the data frame in place. So the, this df refers to some object, it's a data
frame, and then bracket y, and then I'm assigning to that, so I'm altering that data frame in place.
It doesn't make a local copy. So then when I come and do, run ggplot, this df is actually
the altered data frame where the y, where the y column has strings. And that's why it looks like
this. Those are, these are actually, these are actually categorical variables. All right, so
they look like numbers, but they're actually, they're actually just strings here.
All right, now you can fix it in Python, fix the code by, when you, you're working with df up here
and you're modifying it, you say df.copy. And, and then I'm saving that as df2, and then I do
all this stuff. I assign it into df2 and then return that. So that doesn't alter this df that
I'm doing, I'm plotting here. But, you know, you have to know, you have to be aware in Python of,
like, oh, is this, you know, is this thing a reference to an object that somebody else has?
If I alter it, do I have to, you know, can I make a shallow copy or can I make, can I,
do I have to make a deep copy? These are issues that you have to think about with Python. So in
this respect, like, R is actually a lot, is a lot better to work with than, than Python is. But,
you know, people do this all the time, and people write Python code, they manage to write Python
code. So, but you do have to be aware of this thing. All right, sorry, yes, I forgot to put the
move row slides ahead. All right, now the other big difference is that data frames and statistical
tools in Python are in third-party modules. So what I've found is that the basic manipulation
of tabular data in Python with pandas is kind of clunky and unintuitive. Now, this is just,
obviously, just an opinion. This is my opinion. But I've talked to other people, and, you know,
people who even who aren't really R users seem to agree that it is working with tabular,
working with data in Python is, you know, it's kind of awkward. So it's my opinion,
but I'm also right. So there you go. And, yeah, now the other, one good thing about it, those,
like, these things being in third-party modules for Python is that there are, you know, other
competing data frame libraries out there. And so there's other, you know, it's possible for
something else to come that is easier to work with, or faster, or, you know, whatever, whatever
advantages you can think of. But at this time, you know, it's still, it is, like, the go-to
library for manipulating tabular data in Python is still is pandas. So, yeah, that's where it's
at now. Maybe it'll change in the future. Okay. Let's see. Another lesson I learned. So is that
Chinese technology still stands up well. So coming into the Python space with a web framework,
so there it's, there are other things out there that are, that already exist. So, for example,
there's Dash and Streamlet. Those are, these are two popular web frameworks that are, that have,
like, roughly the same level of abstraction and would be used by similar people that are
doing data science. And, you know, Chinese has been around, like I said, it's been around for
10 years. But I think, I think the technology still holds up really well. So, you know, if you
compare it to Dash, now these are, these are, again, I'm going to just preface this by saying
that these are, these are my opinions. This is subjective. So take it with a grain of salt.
But Dash, to me, it seems, like, kind of hard to use for a non-web developer. If you don't already
know a lot about how to build web, how webpages are built, Dash, well, it's going to force you
to learn those things if you want to, if you want to make something nice. And if you look at the
core of Dash, like the computational model, it uses this, an explicit callback model instead
of reactivity, which means that you have to be a lot more, you have to be a lot more explicit about
how you use, how the relationships between various components are set up,
whereas Shiny can figure those things out automatically for you. And
the specific way that they've done it with Dash can result in a lot of data being sent back and
forth between the client and the server, because they try not to keep any state on the server.
So, which, you know, there's benefits to that, but there's also drawbacks.
All right. So, now, if, you know, if we compare it to Streamlet,
Streamlet is an interesting thing. It's gotten very, very popular, and, you know, there's a
reason for that. It's super easy to get started making a Streamlet app. And that's because you
can start with a script doing your data analysis, and then you can just, you can turn that into a
Streamlet application by adding, just by adding some lines of code, right? You don't have to,
like, rewrite the whole thing. But the issue with that is that you quickly hit a ceiling of
what you can do with Streamlet. And this is, you know, this is a tradeoff that they chose to make,
and it obviously works for some people. It works for a lot of people. But it can be quite limiting.
So, what's really limiting about it is the execution model. So, basically, every time
something changes, every time an input changes, like if you move a slider, or, you know, you type
in some text, it'll just, it'll re-execute the entire script each time something changes.
And they have stuff, you know, they have a lot of features that can make that more efficient,
so that it's, you know, you don't have to do, like, massive data processing every time, like,
somebody moves a slider, if you've set up your caching correctly. But there is a limit of what
you can do with caching. And there's just a limit to what you can do in general with a model where,
you know, it just re-executes the whole thing every time. But, you know, it is easy to understand,
so, what's happening. So, there is that. But again, you know, I think Shiny's technology,
the reactivity, it holds up really well, compared to what else is out there. And there's some other
newcomers out there, which, you know, which I'm not talking about here, because I don't know enough
about them yet. All right, let's see what else. So, the next lesson is that looks matter.
What do I mean by that? Well, we know from talking to users that it's really important to be able to
easily create nicer looking apps. And, you know, we are, this is, so, when Shiny came out, it was
really impressive what, you know, the way that things looked, it was really impressive what
you could do with a small amount of code. But now there's other things out there that can do,
there's other frameworks that can do nice looking apps pretty easily. And so, like I said, well,
if you saw Carson's talk prior to this one, you know, we're working on building the foundation
to make it really easy to create nicer looking apps. But that's, like, the foundational stuff
right there. Not, like, the really smarter surface level. Like, if you want to make it
really easy to create nice looking apps, we're not quite there yet. But it's also, like, why
Shiny Dashboard is really popular despite its age. Shiny Dashboard has been around for a number
of years now. And, you know, it looks okay. It looks, maybe it looks a little bit dated,
in my opinion. But it's still quite popular because it's really easy. It's just, like,
it's really easy to just create something that looks, it looks professional.
Or at least professional enough. And you don't have to think about it too much.
And, of course, there's other many third party packages out there, like Shiny Semantic from
Epsilon, BS4Dash, from our interface. But, yeah. So, looks matter. And this reminds me of
something. I think Hadley Wickham said this once. Maybe not quite in these exact words. But,
you know, with ggplot2, people came for the beautiful plots, and they stayed for the beautiful
conceptual model. So, you know, that's I think that's a really useful way of thinking about
things. And hopefully, with Shiny for Python, you know, that's that's we'll be able to do
something similar. So, and, again, it is something that we're working on for Python.
Okay. Next lesson. Balancing progress and backward compatibility is hard.
So, for Shiny, we originally shipped it with, like, batteries included,
in quotes there, which makes things easier for users to get started. So, we had everything that
you needed in one package. All right. We had sliders, we had, you know, Bootstrap for the
web page layout, and so on. So, in the beginning, we actually had a different slider library than
we use today. We used an older version of Bootstrap. We used an older version of jQuery.
And changing these things is hard. The more users you have, and the more users you have,
the harder it is to change them. So, with the slider library, you know, changing that was a
challenge, although we did it a long time ago. Like, what if your slider has generates steps
at different sizes? You know, then if your new slider generates steps at different sizes
from your old slider, then people's apps might behave a little bit different.
And, you know, we bit the bullet, and we just did it when we, you know,
we just changed it at some point. But the more users you have, the harder it is to change that.
And similarly, Bootstrap version 2, at some point, we switched it to Bootstrap version 3.
But that involved changes to markup, that involved changes to CSS classes.
And we provided a shim for people to do that. But now, with BS Lib,
and the Bootstrap project in general is on version 5, and that's what BS Lib is using. So,
being able to move people on to that, you know, it takes work. It doesn't, you can't just, like,
upgrade it, and then everything's going to keep working. jQuery version 1, we moved to jQuery
version 3. And then, you know, there's some subtle page loading issues that could happen in some
cases, because some callbacks would fire at different times with a new version of jQuery.
So, yeah, so, changing these things can be can be hard.
Yeah, so, changing these things can be can be hard.
But the good news is that Shiny for Python sort of provides a laboratory, and gives us a place
and a reason to try new things, and port some good ideas back to R. So, you know, there's motivation
to try to change these things, like change function names. And if things work well,
then, you know, we can take some of those good ideas and bring them back to Shiny for R.
All right, next. The Python world is big. It is very big. So, I read a survey
that Stack Overflow gave out in 2022. And in their survey, they found that 48% of users
use Python, and 4.7 use R. So, that's 10 times as many people that use Python.
And that's almost half of the people that use Stack Overflow. So, that is,
that's an enormous percentage of programmers. Now, it is true that in Python,
like Python users cover many, many different domains. So, only some of those users do data
science. And in R, almost all the users do data science. So, that means that, you know, not all
Python users are necessarily people that would be interested in creating interactive
data web applications. But enough of them are that it's a really large population.
So, in the R community, Shiny is a really large mindshare. In the Python community,
it doesn't. And that's, you know, that's something we have to earn that.
And like I said earlier, at this stage, I think we have the best core technology.
And we're working on better documentation and app aesthetics to earn that mindshare in Python
community. So, if you're thinking about learning Shiny for Python, remember that it is a really
big world out there. And there's a lot of Python shops out there that might be interested in the
things that you can create. So, you know, just there are, this could, you know, learning Shiny
and building cool web apps can open up, could open up a lot of opportunities there.
But, you know, also remember that for now, there's a steeper hill to climb to convince people to go
with Shiny. And hopefully that will change over time. But Shiny is the it's the new thing in the
Python community. As opposed to, like, something that's, you know, been around and more established.
All right. Next lesson. The R community is great. So, R, as I'm sure everyone here knows,
has a very inclusive and welcoming community. And, you know, people in the R community really
put a lot of work into this. It doesn't just sort of happen by itself. And in contrast, you know,
Python, well, it has pockets that can feel like that. But that feeling is not as widespread.
So, it's something that, you know, I always appreciate about the R community. And it's
something that it's a feeling that we try to foster where we can.
But, again, Python is a very large community. All right. Another lesson that we've learned,
which is that this is WebAssembly is very, very cool. So, WebAssembly is what makes Shiny live
possible. And so, if you don't know what Shiny live is, I'll give you a really brief overview.
So, it is Shiny, currently Shiny for Python, without a server running Python. So, normally
when you deploy a Shiny application, you need a server that runs Python or R. And then that
serves the application. And the user loads their web browser and they connect to that server.
With Shiny live, Python runs inside of the browser itself because it's compiled to WebAssembly and
browsers can run programs that are compiled to WebAssembly. So, you don't need a separate
server running R or Python. And this allows for deployment on static web hosts, which can
scale to extreme amounts of traffic for extremely low cost. So, that's great if you have an
application that for certain classes of applications, if you need to handle a lot of
traffic and they don't have some certain needs, which I'll talk about in just a minute,
Shiny live is really great for that. So, it's not appropriate for all use cases. Like, you can't
keep any secrets. If somebody can run your application on their computer, you know, you don't
want to put any, like, secret authorization tokens or anything like that in there because they'll
have access to them. You can't make secure database connections. And it's not, you know, it's not
necessarily good for large datasets because you might not want to transfer large amounts of data
to each user's browser. Okay. But so, even though it has those limits, it's still the really good
thing about it is that you can use the same knowledge of Shiny to create Shiny live applications
or traditional Shiny applications, whichever is appropriate. It's the same, you know, you're just
writing a Shiny application. There's just a few different things that you can do between regular
Shiny and Shiny live applications. So, you can deploy it whichever way is appropriate. And this
gives you much more range in the space of, like, the web applications that you can create.
So, just a little history about it. It started off as Shiny live started off as an experiment.
You know, we took some time when we were developing Shiny for Python to a few months into it, we took
some time to sort of explore, like, hey, what's happening in the Python data science world? And
we came across PyDyed, which is this build of Python for WebAssembly. And I was like, okay,
you know what? It'd be really cool if we could just run this in the browser, if we could run
Shiny entirely in the browser without a server. And, you know, it worked out better than we
expected. So, that was really exciting to see it come together. And we learned something from that
experiment, which is that WebAssembly is awesome. And it's great for educational material. Learners
don't have to switch away to a different app or web page to run code. If you've looked at the Shiny
for Python website, there's on each page, there's examples that you can run. And they're just
running right in the user's web browser. So, people don't have to switch context to somewhere
else. They don't have to, you know, you don't have to spin up a server somewhere, install an
application. You just can run it right in the web page. And also, from the, you know, from the
perspective of somebody who creates the stuff, the content, you don't have to worry about hosting,
because you can put in a static web host, which is very cheap, or scaling, or security. Like,
all that stuff, like, you know, that's not an issue. Security, we used to, you know, we used to
have people, I probably still do, running crypto miners in our RStudio cloud instances. And that's
just not an issue. If somebody wants to run a crypto miner in Shiny live, that's fine. They're
running on their own computer. So, good for them. And this brings me to Web R. So, this is R
compiled to WebAssembly, running in the browser. This was created by George Stagg. And, you know,
as an organization, we learned, what we learned from Shiny live, helped convince us that it would
be worthwhile to hire George to work on Web R full time. So, when he started it, he wasn't working
at Posit. But what we learned from, you know, from working on Shiny live, it's like, oh,
this is, this is really, this is the real deal. This is worth, you know, getting George to work
on this full time. So, and you may have heard, Web R had its first release, 0.1.0 last week. So,
you should definitely go check it out, if you haven't already. It's really cool to see,
you can run R code right in the web browser. And, of course, the reason I'm talking about this is,
yes, we are working on Shiny live for R. I can't give a firm date for this,
but it is something that we're working on. Okay. So, for the R users out there
that know Shiny, Shiny is a great reason to learn Python.
So, here's what I mean by this. So, there's many groups out there that use Python and not R.
And knowing Shiny well is a good way to have access to both Python and R shops.
So, if you know Shiny for R, you can, I think you can quickly learn Shiny for Python,
even if you don't know that much Python to begin with.
And then, and then if you start working with a group that does Python, you can be an expert in
something right from the beginning. So, you can be useful right from the beginning with,
with a Python group. Whereas, you know, if you just, if you were trying to, if you're,
if you just know R, and then you want to start working with some Python people,
you might otherwise just have to start from the beginning and be like a total,
total novice. But if you're, if you, if you learn Shiny for Python first,
you can do something that's really useful and unique right away.
All right. And for Python users, Shiny gives you options. So, if you're a Python user,
so, if you're a Python user, and you, you learn Shiny for Python,
you can create traditional web applications that run on a server.
You can create Shiny live web applications. And you can use your knowledge to write Shiny
for R applications. You know, this, again, if you're just a, it's similar to what I was saying
about R users learning Python. If you're a Python user, and you want to learn R,
you can transfer that Shiny knowledge and be, over to R and be useful right away. And,
and, you know, start working with R users. And that's it. That's what I have to say.
Thank you very much. Thank you for listening to what I have to say.